<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Act 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
				<p>A public place.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b>Adriana</b>, wife to Antipholus (of Ephesus) with <b>Luciana</b> her sister.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Neither my husband nor the slave return’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in such haste I sent to seek his master?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sure, Luciana, it is two o’clock.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from the mart he’s somewhere gone to dinner.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good sister, let us dine, and never fret;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A man is master of his liberty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Time is their master, and when they see time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They’ll go or come. If so, be patient, sister.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>Why should their liberty than ours be more?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Because their business still lies out o’ door.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>Look when I serve him so, he takes it ill.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>O, know he is the bridle of your will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>There’s none but asses will be bridled so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, headstrong liberty is lash’d with woe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s nothing situate under heaven’s eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But hath his bound in earth, in sea, in sky.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are their males’ subjects, and at their controls.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Man, more divine, the masters of all these,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord of the wide world and wild wat’ry seas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Indued with intellectual sense and souls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of more pre-eminence than fish and fowls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are masters to their females, and their lords:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then let your will attend on their accords.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>This servitude makes you to keep unwed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Ere I learn love, I’ll practise to obey.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>How if your husband start some other where?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Till he come home again, I would forbear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Patience unmov’d! No marvel though she pause;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They can be meek that have no other cause.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A wretched soul bruis’d with adversity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We bid be quiet when we hear it cry;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But were we burd’ned with like weight of pain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As much, or more, we should ourselves complain:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With urging helpless patience would relieve me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if thou live to see like right bereft,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This fool-begg’d patience in thee will be left.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, I will marry one day, but to try.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here comes your man, now is your husband nigh.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b>Dromio of Ephesus</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>Say, is your tardy master now at hand?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td>Nay, he’s at two hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>Say, didst thou speak with him? know’st thou his mind?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Spake he so doubtfully thou couldst not feel his meaning?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td>Nay, he struck so plainly I could too well feel his blows; and withal so doubtfully that I could scarce understand them.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But say, I prithee, is he coming home?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It seems he hath great care to please his wife.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td>Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>Horn-mad, thou villain?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I mean not cuckold-mad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But sure he’s stark mad.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I desir’d him to come home to dinner,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He ask’d me for a thousand marks in gold.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“’Tis dinner time,” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Your meat doth burn” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Will you come home?” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“The pig” quoth I “is burn’d”. “My gold,” quoth he.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“My mistress, sir,” quoth I. “Hang up thy mistress;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know not thy mistress; out on thy mistress!”</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Quoth who?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Quoth my master.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“I know,” quoth he, “no house, no wife, no mistress.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So that my errand, due unto my tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go back again, and be new beaten home?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For God’s sake, send some other messenger.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>Back slave, or I will break thy pate across.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And he will bless that cross with other beating.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Between you I shall have a holy head.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>Hence, prating peasant. Fetch thy master home.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Am I so round with you, as you with me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That like a football you do spurn me thus?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I last in this service, you must case me in leather. [<i>Exit.</i>]</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Fie, how impatience loureth in your face.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>His company must do his minions grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst I at home starve for a merry look.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath homely age th’ alluring beauty took</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From my poor cheek? then he hath wasted it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are my discourses dull? barren my wit?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If voluble and sharp discourse be marr’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do their gay vestments his affections bait?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That’s not my fault; he’s master of my state.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What ruins are in me that can be found</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By him not ruin’d? Then is he the ground</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of my defeatures. My decayed fair</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A sunny look of his would soon repair;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And feeds from home; poor I am but his stale.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know his eye doth homage otherwhere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else what lets it but he would be here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sister, you know he promis’d me a chain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would that alone, a love he would detain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So he would keep fair quarter with his bed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see the jewel best enamelled</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will lose his beauty; yet the gold bides still</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That others touch, yet often touching will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wear gold; and no man that hath a name</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll weep what’s left away, and weeping die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>How many fond fools serve mad jealousy! [<i>Exeunt.</i>]</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
				<p>The same.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b>Antipholus of Syracuse</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is wander’d forth in care to seek me out.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By computation and mine host’s report.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I could not speak with Dromio since at first</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b>Dromio of Syracuse</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How now, sir! is your merry humour alter’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As you love strokes, so jest with me again.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You know no Centaur? you receiv’d no gold?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thus so madly thou didst answer me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>What answer, sir? when spake I such a word?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Even now, even here, not half an hour since.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I did not see you since you sent me hence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Villain, thou didst deny the gold’s receipt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And told’st me of a mistress and a dinner,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For which I hope thou felt’st I was displeas’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am glad to see you in this merry vein.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What means this jest, I pray you, master, tell me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think’st thou I jest? Hold, take thou that, and that. [<i>Beats Dromio.</i>]</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hold, sir, for God’s sake, now your jest is earnest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon what bargain do you give it me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Because that I familiarly sometimes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do use you for my fool, and chat with you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your sauciness will jest upon my love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make a common of my serious hours.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you will jest with me, know my aspect,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fashion your demeanour to my looks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or I will beat this method in your sconce.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Sconce, call you it? so you would leave battering, I had rather have it a head. And you use these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head, and ensconce it too, or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders. But I pray, sir, why am I beaten?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Dost thou not know?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Shall I tell you why?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Ay, sir, and wherefore; for they say, every why hath a wherefore.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, first, for flouting me; and then wherefore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For urging it the second time to me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme nor reason?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, sir, I thank you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Thank me, sir, for what?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll make you amends next, to give you nothing for something.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But say, sir, is it dinner-time?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>No, sir; I think the meat wants that I have.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>In good time, sir, what’s that?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Basting.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Well, sir, then ’twill be dry.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>If it be, sir, I pray you eat none of it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Your reason?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Lest it make you choleric, and purchase me another dry basting.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, sir, learn to jest in good time.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s a time for all things.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>I durst have denied that before you were so choleric.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>By what rule, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of Father Time himself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Let’s hear it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>There’s no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>May he not do it by fine and recovery?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and recover the lost hair of another man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an excrement?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts, and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath given them in wit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Why, but there’s many a man hath more hair than wit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>The plainer dealer, the sooner lost. Yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>For what reason?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>For two, and sound ones too.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Nay, not sound, I pray you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Sure ones, then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Certain ones, then.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Name them.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>The one, to save the money that he spends in tiring; the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>You would all this time have proved there is no time for all things.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Marry, and did, sir; namely, e’en no time to recover hair lost by nature.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>But your reason was not substantial why there is no time to recover.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald, and therefore, to the world’s end will have bald followers.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I knew ’twould be a bald conclusion.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But soft! who wafts us yonder?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b>Adriana</b> and <b>Luciana</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not Adriana, nor thy wife.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The time was once when thou unurg’d wouldst vow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never words were music to thine ear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never object pleasing in thine eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never touch well welcome to thy hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never meat sweet-savour’d in thy taste,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless I spake, or look’d, or touch’d, or carv’d to thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou art then estranged from thyself?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thyself I call it, being strange to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, undividable, incorporate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am better than thy dear self’s better part.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, do not tear away thyself from me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For know, my love, as easy mayst thou fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A drop of water in the breaking gulf,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take unmingled thence that drop again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without addition or diminishing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As take from me thyself, and not me too.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How dearly would it touch thee to the quick,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should’st thou but hear I were licentious?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that this body, consecrate to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By ruffian lust should be contaminate?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wouldst thou not spit at me, and spurn at me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hurl the name of husband in my face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tear the stain’d skin off my harlot brow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And break it with a deep-divorcing vow?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know thou canst; and therefore, see thou do it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am possess’d with an adulterate blot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My blood is mingled with the crime of lust;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For if we two be one, and thou play false,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do digest the poison of thy flesh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being strumpeted by thy contagion.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I live distain’d, thou undishonoured.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Ephesus I am but two hours old,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As strange unto your town as to your talk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, every word by all my wit being scann’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wants wit in all one word to understand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fie, brother, how the world is chang’d with you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When were you wont to use my sister thus?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>By Dromio?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>By me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By thee; and this thou didst return from him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he did buffet thee, and in his blows</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Denied my house for his, me for his wife.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is the course and drift of your compact?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>I, sir? I never saw her till this time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Villain, thou liest, for even her very words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>I never spake with her in all my life.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How can she thus, then, call us by our names?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless it be by inspiration.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How ill agrees it with your gravity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Abetting him to thwart me in my mood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be it my wrong, you are from me exempt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes me with thy strength to communicate:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If aught possess thee from me, it is dross,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who all, for want of pruning, with intrusion</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Infect thy sap, and live on thy confusion.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, was I married to her in my dream?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or sleep I now, and think I hear all this?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until I know this sure uncertainty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll entertain the offer’d fallacy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the fairy land; O spite of spites!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We talk with goblins, owls, and sprites;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If we obey them not, this will ensue:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They’ll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why prat’st thou to thyself, and answer’st not?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>I am transformed, master, am I not?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>I think thou art in mind, and so am I.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Thou hast thine own form.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>No, I am an ape.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>If thou art chang’d to aught, ’tis to an ass.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis true; she rides me, and I long for grass.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis so, I am an ass; else it could never be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I should know her as well as she knows me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To put the finger in the eye and weep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst man and master laughs my woes to scorn.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, sir, to dinner; Dromio, keep the gate.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Husband, I’ll dine above with you today,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sirrah, if any ask you for your master,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, sister; Dromio, play the porter well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sleeping or waking, mad, or well-advis’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Known unto these, and to myself disguis’d!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll say as they say, and persever so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in this mist at all adventures go.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Master, shall I be porter at the gate?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Adriana</td>
							<td>Ay; and let none enter, lest I break your pate.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Luciana</td>
							<td>Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late. [<i>Exeunt.</i>]</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
