<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Act 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><b>ACT IV</b></h2>
<h4><b>SCENE I. The same.</b></h4>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Merchant, Angelo</span> and an
<span class="charname">Officer</span>.</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
You know since Pentecost the sum is due,<br/>
And since I have not much importun’d you,<br/>
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound<br/>
To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage;<br/>
Therefore make present satisfaction,<br/>
Or I’ll attach you by this officer.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Even just the sum that I do owe to you<br/>
Is growing to me by Antipholus,<br/>
And in the instant that I met with you<br/>
He had of me a chain; at five o’clock<br/>
I shall receive the money for the same.<br/>
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,<br/>
I will discharge my bond, and thank you too.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Antipholus of Ephesus</span> and
<span class="charname">Dromio of Ephesus</span> from the Courtesan’s.</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
That labour may you save. See where he comes.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
While I go to the goldsmith’s house, go thou<br/>
And buy a rope’s end; that will I bestow<br/>
Among my wife and her confederates<br/>
For locking me out of my doors by day.<br/>
But soft, I see the goldsmith; get thee gone;<br/>
Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I buy a thousand pound a year! I buy a rope!
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exit <span class="charname">Dromio</span>.</i>]</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
A man is well holp up that trusts to you,<br/>
I promised your presence and the chain,<br/>
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.<br/>
Belike you thought our love would last too long<br/>
If it were chain’d together, and therefore came not.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Saving your merry humour, here’s the note<br/>
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,<br/>
The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion,<br/>
Which doth amount to three odd ducats more<br/>
Than I stand debted to this gentleman.<br/>
I pray you, see him presently discharg’d,<br/>
For he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I am not furnished with the present money;<br/>
Besides, I have some business in the town.<br/>
Good signior, take the stranger to my house,<br/>
And with you take the chain, and bid my wife<br/>
Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof;<br/>
Perchance I will be there as soon as you.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Then you will bring the chain to her yourself.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
No, bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
And if I have not, sir, I hope you have,<br/>
Or else you may return without your money.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain;<br/>
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,<br/>
And I, to blame, have held him here too long.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Good Lord, you use this dalliance to excuse<br/>
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine.<br/>
I should have chid you for not bringing it,<br/>
But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
The hour steals on; I pray you, sir, dispatch.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
You hear how he importunes me. The chain!
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.<br/>
Either send the chain or send by me some token.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Fie, now you run this humour out of breath.<br/>
Come, where’s the chain? I pray you, let me see it.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
My business cannot brook this dalliance.<br/>
Good sir, say whe’er you’ll answer me or no;<br/>
If not, I’ll leave him to the officer.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I answer you? What should I answer you?
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
The money that you owe me for the chain.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I owe you none till I receive the chain.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
You know I gave it you half an hour since.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
You gave me none. You wrong me much to say so.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
You wrong me more, sir, in denying it.<br/>
Consider how it stands upon my credit.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.
</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
I do, and charge you in the duke’s name to obey me.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
This touches me in reputation.<br/>
Either consent to pay this sum for me,<br/>
Or I attach you by this officer.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Consent to pay thee that I never had?<br/>
Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou dar’st.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Here is thy fee; arrest him, officer.<br/>
I would not spare my brother in this case<br/>
If he should scorn me so apparently.
</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
I do arrest you, sir. You hear the suit.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I do obey thee till I give thee bail.<br/>
But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear<br/>
As all the metal in your shop will answer.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Sir, sir, I shall have law in Ephesus,<br/>
To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Dromio of Syracuse</span>
from the bay.</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Master, there’s a bark of Epidamnum<br/>
That stays but till her owner comes aboard,<br/>
And then, sir, bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,<br/>
I have convey’d aboard, and I have bought<br/>
The oil, the balsamum, and aqua-vitae.<br/>
The ship is in her trim; the merry wind<br/>
Blows fair from land; they stay for nought at all<br/>
But for their owner, master, and yourself.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
How now? a madman? Why, thou peevish sheep,<br/>
What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope,<br/>
And told thee to what purpose and what end.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
You sent me for a rope’s end as soon.<br/>
You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I will debate this matter at more leisure,<br/>
And teach your ears to list me with more heed.<br/>
To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight:<br/>
Give her this key, and tell her in the desk<br/>
That’s cover’d o’er with Turkish tapestry<br/>
There is a purse of ducats; let her send it.<br/>
Tell her I am arrested in the street,<br/>
And that shall bail me. Hie thee, slave; be gone.<br/>
On, officer, to prison till it come.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt <span class="charname">Merchant, Angelo, Officer</span>
and <span class="charname">Antipholus of Ephesus</span>.</i>]</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
To Adriana, that is where we din’d,<br/>
Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband.<br/>
She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.<br/>
Thither I must, although against my will,<br/>
For servants must their masters’ minds fulfil.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exit.</i>]</p>
<h4><b>SCENE II. The same.</b></h4>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Adriana</span> and
<span class="charname">Luciana</span>.</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?<br/>
Might’st thou perceive austerely in his eye<br/>
That he did plead in earnest, yea or no?<br/>
Look’d he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?<br/>
What observation mad’st thou in this case<br/>
Of his heart’s meteors tilting in his face?
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
First he denied you had in him no right.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
He meant he did me none; the more my spite.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
Then pleaded I for you.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
And what said he?
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
That love I begg’d for you he begg’d of me.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
With words that in an honest suit might move.<br/>
First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Did’st speak him fair?
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
Have patience, I beseech.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
I cannot, nor I will not hold me still.<br/>
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.<br/>
He is deformed, crooked, old, and sere,<br/>
Ill-fac’d, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere;<br/>
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind,<br/>
Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
Who would be jealous then of such a one?<br/>
No evil lost is wail’d when it is gone.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Ah, but I think him better than I say,<br/>
And yet would herein others’ eyes were worse:<br/>
Far from her nest the lapwing cries away;<br/>
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Dromio of Syracuse</span>.</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Here, go; the desk, the purse, sweet now, make haste.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
How hast thou lost thy breath?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
By running fast.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Where is thy master, Dromio? is he well?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
No, he’s in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.<br/>
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him,<br/>
One whose hard heart is button’d up with steel;<br/>
A fiend, a fairy, pitiless and rough;<br/>
A wolf, nay worse, a fellow all in buff;<br/>
A back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that countermands<br/>
The passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands;<br/>
A hound that runs counter, and yet draws dryfoot well,<br/>
One that, before the judgment, carries poor souls to hell.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Why, man, what is the matter?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
I do not know the matter. He is ’rested on the case.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
I know not at whose suit he is arrested, well;<br/>
But he’s in a suit of buff which ’rested him, that can I tell.<br/>
Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Go fetch it, sister. This I wonder at,
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exit <span class="charname">Luciana</span>.</i>]</p>
<p>Thus he unknown to me should be in debt.<br/>
Tell me, was he arrested on a band?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Not on a band, but on a stronger thing;<br/>
A chain, a chain. Do you not hear it ring?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
What, the chain?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
No, no, the bell, ’tis time that I were gone.<br/>
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
The hours come back! That did I never hear.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
O yes, if any hour meet a sergeant, ’a turns back for very fear.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
As if time were in debt. How fondly dost thou reason!
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than he’s worth to season.<br/>
Nay, he’s a thief too. Have you not heard men say<br/>
That time comes stealing on by night and day?<br/>
If he be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,<br/>
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Luciana</span>.</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Go, Dromio, there’s the money, bear it straight,<br/>
And bring thy master home immediately.<br/>
Come, sister, I am press’d down with conceit;<br/>
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt.</i>]</p>
<h4><b>SCENE III. The same.</b></h4>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Antipholus of Syracuse</span>.</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
There’s not a man I meet but doth salute me<br/>
As if I were their well-acquainted friend,<br/>
And everyone doth call me by my name.<br/>
Some tender money to me, some invite me;<br/>
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses;<br/>
Some offer me commodities to buy.<br/>
Even now a tailor call’d me in his shop,<br/>
And show’d me silks that he had bought for me,<br/>
And therewithal took measure of my body.<br/>
Sure, these are but imaginary wiles,<br/>
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Dromio of Syracuse</span>.</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Master, here’s the gold you sent me for.<br/>
What, have you got the picture of old Adam new apparelled?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
What gold is this? What Adam dost thou mean?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Not that Adam that kept the paradise, but that Adam that keeps
the prison; he that goes in the calf’s skin that was killed for
the Prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil angel,
and bid you forsake your liberty.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
I understand thee not.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
No? Why, ’tis a plain case: he that went like a bass-viol in a case of
leather; the man, sir, that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob, and
’rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men and gives them suits
of durance; he that sets up his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a
morris-pike.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
What! thou mean’st an officer?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band; he that brings any man to answer it that
breaks his band; one that thinks a man always going to bed, and says,
“God give you good rest.”
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is there any ship puts
forth tonight? may we be gone?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the bark <i>Expedition</i> put
forth tonight, and then were you hindered by the sergeant to tarry for the hoy
<i>Delay</i>. Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
The fellow is distract, and so am I,<br/>
And here we wander in illusions.<br/>
Some blessed power deliver us from hence!
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter a <span class="charname">Courtesan</span>.</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.<br/>
I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now.<br/>
Is that the chain you promis’d me today?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Master, is this Mistress Satan?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
It is the devil.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Nay, she is worse, she is the devil’s dam; and here she comes in the
habit of a light wench, and thereof comes that the wenches say “God damn
me”, that’s as much to say, “God make me a light
wench.” It is written they appear to men like angels of light. Light is
an effect of fire, and fire will burn; ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not
near her.
</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
Your man and you are marvellous merry, sir.<br/>
Will you go with me? We’ll mend our dinner here.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat, or bespeak a long spoon.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Why, Dromio?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Avoid then, fiend! What tell’st thou me of supping?<br/>
Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress.<br/>
I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.
</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,<br/>
Or, for my diamond, the chain you promis’d,<br/>
And I’ll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Some devils ask but the paring of one’s nail,<br/>
A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,<br/>
A nut, a cherry-stone; but she, more covetous,<br/>
Would have a chain.<br/>
Master, be wise; and if you give it her,<br/>
The devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.
</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain;<br/>
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Avaunt, thou witch! Come, Dromio, let us go.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Fly pride, says the peacock. Mistress, that you know.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt <span class="charname">Antipholus of Syracuse</span> and
<span class="charname">Dromio of Syracuse</span>.</i>]</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad,<br/>
Else would he never so demean himself.<br/>
A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats,<br/>
And for the same he promis’d me a chain;<br/>
Both one and other he denies me now.<br/>
The reason that I gather he is mad,<br/>
Besides this present instance of his rage,<br/>
Is a mad tale he told today at dinner<br/>
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.<br/>
Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits,<br/>
On purpose shut the doors against his way.<br/>
My way is now to hie home to his house,<br/>
And tell his wife that, being lunatic,<br/>
He rush’d into my house and took perforce<br/>
My ring away. This course I fittest choose,<br/>
For forty ducats is too much to lose.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exit.</i>]</p>
<h4><b>SCENE IV. The same.</b></h4>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Antipholus of Ephesus</span>
with an <span class="charname">Officer</span>.</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Fear me not, man, I will not break away:<br/>
I’ll give thee ere I leave thee so much money,<br/>
To warrant thee, as I am ’rested for.<br/>
My wife is in a wayward mood today,<br/>
And will not lightly trust the messenger<br/>
That I should be attach’d in Ephesus;<br/>
I tell you ’twill sound harshly in her ears.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Dromio of Ephesus</span> with a rope’s end.</p>
<p>Here comes my man. I think he brings the money.<br/>
How now, sir! have you that I sent you for?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Here’s that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
But where’s the money?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I’ll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
To a rope’s end, sir; and to that end am I return’d.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Beating him.</i>]</p>
<p>OFFICER. <br/>
Good sir, be patient.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Nay, ’tis for me to be patient. I am in adversity.
</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
Good now, hold thy tongue.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Thou whoreson, senseless villain.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel your blows.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an ass.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I am an ass indeed; you may prove it by my long ears. I have served him from
the hour of my nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for my
service but blows. When I am cold, he heats me with beating; when I am warm he
cools me with beating. I am waked with it when I sleep, raised with it when I
sit, driven out of doors with it when I go from home, welcomed home with it
when I return. Nay, I bear it on my shoulders as a beggar wont her brat; and I
think when he hath lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Adriana, Luciana,
Courtesan</span> and a Schoolmaster called <span class="charname">Pinch</span>.</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Come, go along, my wife is coming yonder.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Mistress, <i>respice finem</i>, respect your end, or rather, the prophesy like
the parrot, “Beware the rope’s end.”
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Wilt thou still talk?<br/>
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Beats him.</i>]</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
How say you now? Is not your husband mad?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
His incivility confirms no less.<br/>
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer;<br/>
Establish him in his true sense again,<br/>
And I will please you what you will demand.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy.
</p>
<p>PINCH.<br/>
Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
</p>
<p>PINCH.<br/>
I charge thee, Satan, hous’d within this man,<br/>
To yield possession to my holy prayers,<br/>
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight.<br/>
I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Peace, doting wizard, peace; I am not mad.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
O, that thou wert not, poor distressed soul!
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
You minion, you, are these your customers?<br/>
Did this companion with the saffron face<br/>
Revel and feast it at my house today,<br/>
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut,<br/>
And I denied to enter in my house?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
O husband, God doth know you din’d at home,<br/>
Where would you had remain’d until this time,<br/>
Free from these slanders and this open shame.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Din’d at home? Thou villain, what sayest thou?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Were not my doors lock’d up and I shut out?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Perdy, your doors were lock’d, and you shut out.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
And did not she herself revile me there?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Sans fable, she herself revil’d you there.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Certes, she did, the kitchen-vestal scorn’d you.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
And did not I in rage depart from thence?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
In verity, you did; my bones bear witness,<br/>
That since have felt the vigour of his rage.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Is’t good to soothe him in these contraries?
</p>
<p>PINCH.<br/>
It is no shame; the fellow finds his vein,<br/>
And yielding to him, humours well his frenzy.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Thou hast suborn’d the goldsmith to arrest me.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Alas! I sent you money to redeem you<br/>
By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Money by me? Heart and goodwill you might,<br/>
But surely, master, not a rag of money.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Went’st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
He came to me, and I deliver’d it.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
And I am witness with her that she did.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
God and the rope-maker bear me witness<br/>
That I was sent for nothing but a rope.
</p>
<p>PINCH.<br/>
Mistress, both man and master is possess’d,<br/>
I know it by their pale and deadly looks.<br/>
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth today,<br/>
And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
And gentle master, I receiv’d no gold;<br/>
But I confess, sir, that we were lock’d out.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Dissembling villain, thou speak’st false in both.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all,<br/>
And art confederate with a damned pack<br/>
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me.<br/>
But with these nails I’ll pluck out these false eyes<br/>
That would behold in me this shameful sport.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Enter three or four, and offer to bind him. He strives.
</i>]</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
O, bind him, bind him; let him not come near me.
</p>
<p>PINCH.<br/>
More company; the fiend is strong within him.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
What, will you murder me? Thou jailer, thou,<br/>
I am thy prisoner. Wilt thou suffer them<br/>
To make a rescue?
</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
Masters, let him go.<br/>
He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
</p>
<p>PINCH.<br/>
Go, bind this man, for he is frantic too.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?<br/>
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man<br/>
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?
</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
He is my prisoner. If I let him go,<br/>
The debt he owes will be requir’d of me.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee;<br/>
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,<br/>
And knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.<br/>
Good master doctor, see him safe convey’d<br/>
Home to my house. O most unhappy day!
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
O most unhappy strumpet!
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Master, I am here enter’d in bond for you.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Will you be bound for nothing? Be mad, good master; cry, “the devil”.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt <span class="charname">Pinch</span> and Assistants, with
<span class="charname">Antipholus of Ephesus</span> and
<span class="charname">Dromio of Ephesus</span>.</i>]</p>
<p>Say now, whose suit is he arrested at?
</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
One Angelo, a goldsmith; do you know him?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
I know the man. What is the sum he owes?
</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
Two hundred ducats.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Say, how grows it due?
</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
Due for a chain your husband had of him.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.
</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
When as your husband, all in rage, today<br/>
Came to my house and took away my ring,<br/>
The ring I saw upon his finger now,<br/>
Straight after did I meet him with a chain.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
It may be so, but I did never see it.<br/>
Come, jailer, bring me where the goldsmith is,<br/>
I long to know the truth hereof at large.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Antipholus of Syracuse</span> with his rapier drawn, and
<span class="charname">Dromio of Syracuse</span>.</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
God, for thy mercy, they are loose again!
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
And come with naked swords. Let’s call more help<br/>
To have them bound again.
</p>
<p>OFFICER.<br/>
Away, they’ll kill us.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt, as fast as may be, frighted.</i>]</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
I see these witches are afraid of swords.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
She that would be your wife now ran from you.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Come to the Centaur, fetch our stuff from thence.<br/>
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Faith, stay here this night, they will surely do us no harm; you saw they speak
us fair, give us gold. Methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for the
mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me, I could find in my heart to
stay here still and turn witch.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
I will not stay tonight for all the town;<br/>
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt.</i>]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
