<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Act 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><b>ACT V</b></h2>
<h4><b>SCENE I. The same.</b></h4>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Merchant</span> and
<span class="charname">Angelo</span>.</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
I am sorry, sir, that I have hinder’d you,<br/>
But I protest he had the chain of me,<br/>
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
How is the man esteem’d here in the city?
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Of very reverend reputation, sir,<br/>
Of credit infinite, highly belov’d,<br/>
Second to none that lives here in the city.<br/>
His word might bear my wealth at any time.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
Speak softly. Yonder, as I think, he walks.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Antipholus of Syracuse</span> and
<span class="charname">Dromio of Syracuse</span>.</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
’Tis so; and that self chain about his neck<br/>
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.<br/>
Good sir, draw near to me, I’ll speak to him.<br/>
Signior Antipholus, I wonder much<br/>
That you would put me to this shame and trouble,<br/>
And not without some scandal to yourself,<br/>
With circumstance and oaths so to deny<br/>
This chain, which now you wear so openly.<br/>
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,<br/>
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,<br/>
Who, but for staying on our controversy,<br/>
Had hoisted sail and put to sea today.<br/>
This chain you had of me, can you deny it?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
I think I had: I never did deny it.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
These ears of mine, thou know’st, did hear thee.<br/>
Fie on thee, wretch. ’Tis pity that thou liv’st<br/>
To walk where any honest men resort.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus;<br/>
I’ll prove mine honour and mine honesty<br/>
Against thee presently, if thou dar’st stand.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>They draw.</i>]</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Adriana, Luciana, Courtesan</span>
and others.</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Hold, hurt him not, for God’s sake, he is mad.<br/>
Some get within him, take his sword away.<br/>
Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Run, master, run, for God’s sake, take a house.<br/>
This is some priory; in, or we are spoil’d.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt <span class="charname">Antipholus of Syracuse</span> and
<span class="charname">Dromio of Syracuse</span> to the priory.</i>]</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter Lady <span class="charname">Abbess</span>.</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.<br/>
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast<br/>
And bear him home for his recovery.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
I knew he was not in his perfect wits.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
I am sorry now that I did draw on him.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
How long hath this possession held the man?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,<br/>
And much different from the man he was.<br/>
But till this afternoon his passion<br/>
Ne’er brake into extremity of rage.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Hath he not lost much wealth by wreck of sea?<br/>
Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye<br/>
Stray’d his affection in unlawful love?<br/>
A sin prevailing much in youthful men<br/>
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing?<br/>
Which of these sorrows is he subject to?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
To none of these, except it be the last,<br/>
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
You should for that have reprehended him.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Why, so I did.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Ay, but not rough enough.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
As roughly as my modesty would let me.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Haply in private.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
And in assemblies too.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Ay, but not enough.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
It was the copy of our conference.<br/>
In bed he slept not for my urging it;<br/>
At board he fed not for my urging it;<br/>
Alone, it was the subject of my theme;<br/>
In company I often glanced it;<br/>
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
And thereof came it that the man was mad.<br/>
The venom clamours of a jealous woman<br/>
Poisons more deadly than a mad dog’s tooth.<br/>
It seems his sleeps were hindered by thy railing,<br/>
And thereof comes it that his head is light.<br/>
Thou say’st his meat was sauc’d with thy upbraidings.<br/>
Unquiet meals make ill digestions;<br/>
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred,<br/>
And what’s a fever but a fit of madness?<br/>
Thou say’st his sports were hinder’d by thy brawls.<br/>
Sweet recreation barr’d, what doth ensue<br/>
But moody and dull melancholy,<br/>
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,<br/>
And at her heels a huge infectious troop<br/>
Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?<br/>
In food, in sport, and life-preserving rest<br/>
To be disturb’d would mad or man or beast.<br/>
The consequence is, then, thy jealous fits<br/>
Hath scar’d thy husband from the use of’s wits.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
She never reprehended him but mildly,<br/>
When he demean’d himself rough, rude, and wildly.<br/>
Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
She did betray me to my own reproof.<br/>
Good people, enter and lay hold on him.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
No, not a creature enters in my house.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Neither. He took this place for sanctuary,<br/>
And it shall privilege him from your hands<br/>
Till I have brought him to his wits again,<br/>
Or lose my labour in assaying it.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
I will attend my husband, be his nurse,<br/>
Diet his sickness, for it is my office,<br/>
And will have no attorney but myself;<br/>
And therefore let me have him home with me.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Be patient, for I will not let him stir<br/>
Till I have used the approved means I have,<br/>
With wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers,<br/>
To make of him a formal man again.<br/>
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,<br/>
A charitable duty of my order;<br/>
Therefore depart, and leave him here with me.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
I will not hence and leave my husband here;<br/>
And ill it doth beseem your holiness<br/>
To separate the husband and the wife.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Be quiet and depart. Thou shalt not have him.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exit <span class="charname">Abbess</span>.</i>]</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
Complain unto the duke of this indignity.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Come, go. I will fall prostrate at his feet,<br/>
And never rise until my tears and prayers<br/>
Have won his grace to come in person hither<br/>
And take perforce my husband from the abbess.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
By this, I think, the dial points at five.<br/>
Anon, I’m sure, the Duke himself in person<br/>
Comes this way to the melancholy vale,<br/>
The place of death and sorry execution<br/>
Behind the ditches of the abbey here.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
Upon what cause?
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,<br/>
Who put unluckily into this bay<br/>
Against the laws and statutes of this town,<br/>
Beheaded publicly for his offence.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
See where they come. We will behold his death.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
Kneel to the Duke before he pass the abbey.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter the <span class="charname">Duke</span>, attended;
<span class="charname">Egeon</span>, bareheaded; with the
<span class="charname">Headsman</span> and other Officers.</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Yet once again proclaim it publicly,<br/>
If any friend will pay the sum for him,<br/>
He shall not die; so much we tender him.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess!
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
She is a virtuous and a reverend lady,<br/>
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
May it please your grace, Antipholus, my husband,<br/>
Who I made lord of me and all I had<br/>
At your important letters, this ill day<br/>
A most outrageous fit of madness took him;<br/>
That desp’rately he hurried through the street,<br/>
With him his bondman all as mad as he,<br/>
Doing displeasure to the citizens<br/>
By rushing in their houses, bearing thence<br/>
Rings, jewels, anything his rage did like.<br/>
Once did I get him bound and sent him home,<br/>
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,<br/>
That here and there his fury had committed.<br/>
Anon, I wot not by what strong escape,<br/>
He broke from those that had the guard of him,<br/>
And with his mad attendant and himself,<br/>
Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords,<br/>
Met us again, and, madly bent on us,<br/>
Chased us away; till raising of more aid,<br/>
We came again to bind them. Then they fled<br/>
Into this abbey, whither we pursued them.<br/>
And here the abbess shuts the gates on us,<br/>
And will not suffer us to fetch him out,<br/>
Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence.<br/>
Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command<br/>
Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Long since thy husband serv’d me in my wars,<br/>
And I to thee engag’d a prince’s word,<br/>
When thou didst make him master of thy bed,<br/>
To do him all the grace and good I could.<br/>
Go, some of you, knock at the abbey gate,<br/>
And bid the lady abbess come to me.<br/>
I will determine this before I stir.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter a <span class="charname">Messenger</span>.</p>
<p>MESSENGER.<br/>
O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself.<br/>
My master and his man are both broke loose,<br/>
Beaten the maids a-row, and bound the doctor,<br/>
Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire,<br/>
And ever as it blazed they threw on him<br/>
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair.<br/>
My master preaches patience to him, and the while<br/>
His man with scissors nicks him like a fool;<br/>
And sure (unless you send some present help)<br/>
Between them they will kill the conjurer.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Peace, fool, thy master and his man are here,<br/>
And that is false thou dost report to us.
</p>
<p>MESSENGER.<br/>
Mistress, upon my life, I tell you true.<br/>
I have not breath’d almost since I did see it.<br/>
He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you,<br/>
To scorch your face and to disfigure you.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Cry within.</i>]</p>
<p>Hark, hark, I hear him, mistress. Fly, be gone!
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Come, stand by me, fear nothing. Guard with halberds.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Ay me, it is my husband. Witness you<br/>
That he is borne about invisible.<br/>
Even now we hous’d him in the abbey here,<br/>
And now he’s there, past thought of human reason.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter <span class="charname">Antipholus</span> and
<span class="charname">Dromio of Ephesus</span>.</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Justice, most gracious duke; O, grant me justice!<br/>
Even for the service that long since I did thee<br/>
When I bestrid thee in the wars, and took<br/>
Deep scars to save thy life; even for the blood<br/>
That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,<br/>
I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there.<br/>
She whom thou gav’st to me to be my wife;<br/>
That hath abused and dishonour’d me<br/>
Even in the strength and height of injury.<br/>
Beyond imagination is the wrong<br/>
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me<br/>
While she with harlots feasted in my house.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
A grievous fault. Say, woman, didst thou so?
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
No, my good lord. Myself, he, and my sister<br/>
Today did dine together. So befall my soul<br/>
As this is false he burdens me withal.
</p>
<p>LUCIANA.<br/>
Ne’er may I look on day nor sleep on night<br/>
But she tells to your highness simple truth.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
O perjur’d woman! They are both forsworn.<br/>
In this the madman justly chargeth them.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
My liege, I am advised what I say,<br/>
Neither disturb’d with the effect of wine,<br/>
Nor heady-rash, provok’d with raging ire,<br/>
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.<br/>
This woman lock’d me out this day from dinner.<br/>
That goldsmith there, were he not pack’d with her,<br/>
Could witness it, for he was with me then,<br/>
Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,<br/>
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,<br/>
Where Balthasar and I did dine together.<br/>
Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,<br/>
I went to seek him. In the street I met him,<br/>
And in his company that gentleman.<br/>
There did this perjur’d goldsmith swear me down<br/>
That I this day of him receiv’d the chain,<br/>
Which, God he knows, I saw not. For the which<br/>
He did arrest me with an officer.<br/>
I did obey, and sent my peasant home<br/>
For certain ducats. He with none return’d.<br/>
Then fairly I bespoke the officer<br/>
To go in person with me to my house.<br/>
By th’ way we met<br/>
My wife, her sister, and a rabble more<br/>
Of vile confederates. Along with them<br/>
They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain,<br/>
A mere anatomy, a mountebank,<br/>
A threadbare juggler, and a fortune-teller;<br/>
A needy, hollow-ey’d, sharp-looking wretch;<br/>
A living dead man. This pernicious slave,<br/>
Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer,<br/>
And gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,<br/>
And with no face (as ’twere) outfacing me,<br/>
Cries out, I was possess’d. Then altogether<br/>
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence,<br/>
And in a dark and dankish vault at home<br/>
There left me and my man, both bound together,<br/>
Till gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,<br/>
I gain’d my freedom and immediately<br/>
Ran hither to your Grace, whom I beseech<br/>
To give me ample satisfaction<br/>
For these deep shames and great indignities.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him,<br/>
That he din’d not at home, but was lock’d out.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
But had he such a chain of thee, or no?
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
He had, my lord, and when he ran in here<br/>
These people saw the chain about his neck.
</p>
<p>MERCHANT.<br/>
Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine<br/>
Heard you confess you had the chain of him,<br/>
After you first forswore it on the mart,<br/>
And thereupon I drew my sword on you;<br/>
And then you fled into this abbey here,<br/>
From whence I think you are come by miracle.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I never came within these abbey walls,<br/>
Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me.<br/>
I never saw the chain, so help me heaven;<br/>
And this is false you burden me withal.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Why, what an intricate impeach is this!<br/>
I think you all have drunk of Circe’s cup.<br/>
If here you hous’d him, here he would have been.<br/>
If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly.<br/>
You say he din’d at home, the goldsmith here<br/>
Denies that saying. Sirrah, what say you?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.
</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
He did, and from my finger snatch’d that ring.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
’Tis true, my liege, this ring I had of her.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Saw’st thou him enter at the abbey here?
</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
As sure, my liege, as I do see your grace.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Why, this is strange. Go call the abbess hither.<br/>
I think you are all mated, or stark mad.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exit one to the Abbess.</i>]</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
Most mighty Duke, vouchsafe me speak a word;<br/>
Haply I see a friend will save my life<br/>
And pay the sum that may deliver me.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
Is not your name, sir, call’d Antipholus?<br/>
And is not that your bondman Dromio?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Within this hour I was his bondman, sir,<br/>
But he, I thank him, gnaw’d in two my cords.<br/>
Now am I Dromio, and his man, unbound.
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
I am sure you both of you remember me.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you.<br/>
For lately we were bound as you are now.<br/>
You are not Pinch’s patient, are you, sir?
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
Why look you strange on me? you know me well.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I never saw you in my life till now.
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
O! grief hath chang’d me since you saw me last,<br/>
And careful hours with time’s deformed hand,<br/>
Have written strange defeatures in my face.<br/>
But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Neither.
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
Dromio, nor thou?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
No, trust me, sir, nor I.
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
I am sure thou dost.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not, and whatsoever a man denies, you
are now bound to believe him.
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
Not know my voice! O time’s extremity,<br/>
Hast thou so crack’d and splitted my poor tongue<br/>
In seven short years that here my only son<br/>
Knows not my feeble key of untun’d cares?<br/>
Though now this grained face of mine be hid<br/>
In sap-consuming winter’s drizzled snow,<br/>
And all the conduits of my blood froze up,<br/>
Yet hath my night of life some memory,<br/>
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left,<br/>
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear.<br/>
All these old witnesses, I cannot err,<br/>
Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I never saw my father in my life.
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy,<br/>
Thou know’st we parted; but perhaps, my son,<br/>
Thou sham’st to acknowledge me in misery.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
The duke and all that know me in the city,<br/>
Can witness with me that it is not so.<br/>
I ne’er saw Syracusa in my life.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years<br/>
Have I been patron to Antipholus,<br/>
During which time he ne’er saw Syracusa.<br/>
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.
</p>
<p class="scenedesc"> Enter the <span class="charname">Abbess</span> with
<span class="charname">Antipholus of Syracuse</span> and <span class="charname">Dromio
of Syracuse</span>.</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Most mighty duke, behold a man much wrong’d.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>All gather to see them.</i>]</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
One of these men is <i>genius</i> to the other;<br/>
And so of these, which is the natural man,<br/>
And which the spirit? Who deciphers them?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
I, sir, am Dromio, command him away.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I, sir, am Dromio, pray let me stay.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Egeon, art thou not? or else his ghost?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
O, my old master, who hath bound him here?
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds,<br/>
And gain a husband by his liberty.<br/>
Speak, old Egeon, if thou be’st the man<br/>
That hadst a wife once called Emilia,<br/>
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons.<br/>
O, if thou be’st the same Egeon, speak,<br/>
And speak unto the same Emilia!
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Why, here begins his morning story right:<br/>
These two Antipholus’, these two so like,<br/>
And these two Dromios, one in semblance,<br/>
Besides her urging of her wreck at sea.<br/>
These are the parents to these children,<br/>
Which accidentally are met together.<br/>
</p>
<p>EGEON.<br/>
If I dream not, thou art Emilia.<br/>
If thou art she, tell me where is that son<br/>
That floated with thee on the fatal raft?
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
By men of Epidamnum, he and I<br/>
And the twin Dromio, all were taken up;<br/>
But, by and by, rude fishermen of Corinth<br/>
By force took Dromio and my son from them,<br/>
And me they left with those of Epidamnum.<br/>
What then became of them I cannot tell;<br/>
I to this fortune that you see me in.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Antipholus, thou cam’st from Corinth first?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
No, sir, not I, I came from Syracuse.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
Stay, stand apart, I know not which is which.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
And I with him.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Brought to this town by that most famous warrior,<br/>
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
Which of you two did dine with me today?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
I, gentle mistress.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
And are not you my husband?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
No, I say nay to that.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
And so do I, yet did she call me so;<br/>
And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here,<br/>
Did call me brother. What I told you then,<br/>
I hope I shall have leisure to make good,<br/>
If this be not a dream I see and hear.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
I think it be, sir. I deny it not.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.
</p>
<p>ANGELO.<br/>
I think I did, sir. I deny it not.
</p>
<p>ADRIANA.<br/>
I sent you money, sir, to be your bail<br/>
By Dromio, but I think he brought it not.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
No, none by me.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
This purse of ducats I receiv’d from you,<br/>
And Dromio my man did bring them me.<br/>
I see we still did meet each other’s man,<br/>
And I was ta’en for him, and he for me,<br/>
And thereupon these errors are arose.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
These ducats pawn I for my father here.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
It shall not need, thy father hath his life.
</p>
<p>COURTESAN.<br/>
Sir, I must have that diamond from you.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
There, take it, and much thanks for my good cheer.
</p>
<p>ABBESS.<br/>
Renowned duke, vouchsafe to take the pains<br/>
To go with us into the abbey here,<br/>
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes;<br/>
And all that are assembled in this place,<br/>
That by this sympathised one day’s error<br/>
Have suffer’d wrong, go, keep us company,<br/>
And we shall make full satisfaction.<br/>
Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail<br/>
Of you, my sons, and till this present hour<br/>
My heavy burden ne’er delivered.<br/>
The duke, my husband, and my children both,<br/>
And you, the calendars of their nativity,<br/>
Go to a gossips’ feast, and go with me.<br/>
After so long grief, such nativity.
</p>
<p>DUKE.<br/>
With all my heart, I’ll gossip at this feast.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt except the two <span class="charname">Dromios</span>
and two Brothers.</i>]
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embark’d?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.
</p>
<p>ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
He speaks to me; I am your master, Dromio.<br/>
Come, go with us. We’ll look to that anon.<br/>
Embrace thy brother there, rejoice with him.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt <span class="charname">Antipholus of Syracuse</span>
and <span class="charname">Antipholus of Ephesus</span>.</i>]</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
There is a fat friend at your master’s house,<br/>
That kitchen’d me for you today at dinner.<br/>
She now shall be my sister, not my wife.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother.<br/>
I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth.<br/>
Will you walk in to see their gossiping?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
Not I, sir, you are my elder.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
That’s a question, how shall we try it?
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.<br/>
We’ll draw cuts for the senior. Till then, lead thou first.
</p>
<p>DROMIO OF EPHESUS.<br/>
Nay, then, thus:<br/>
We came into the world like brother and brother,<br/>
And now let’s go hand in hand, not one before another.
</p>
<p class="right"> [<i>Exeunt.</i>]</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
