<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
				<p>A hall in the Duke’s palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegeon</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Jailer</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Officers</b> and other <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Attendants</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegeon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by the doom of death end woes and all.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Merchant of Syracusa, plead no more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not partial to infringe our laws.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The enmity and discord which of late</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your Duke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have seal’d his rigorous statutes with their bloods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Excludes all pity from our threat’ning looks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For since the mortal and intestine jars</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It hath in solemn synods been decreed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To admit no traffic to our adverse towns;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay more, if any born at Ephesus</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be seen at Syracusian marts and fairs;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Again, if any Syracusian born</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His goods confiscate to the Duke’s dispose,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless a thousand marks be levied</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To quit the penalty and to ransom him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot amount unto a hundred marks;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore by law thou art condemn’d to die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegeon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yet this my comfort; when your words are done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My woes end likewise with the evening sun.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why thou departedst from thy native home,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for what cause thou cam’st to Ephesus.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegeon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A heavier task could not have been impos’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, that the world may witness that my end</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll utter what my sorrow gives me leave.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Syracusa was I born, and wed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto a woman happy but for me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by me, had not our hap been bad.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With her I liv’d in joy; our wealth increas’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By prosperous voyages I often made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Epidamnum, till my factor’s death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the great care of goods at random left,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whom my absence was not six months old</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before herself (almost at fainting under</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pleasing punishment that women bear)</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had made provision for her following me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And soon and safe arrived where I was.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There had she not been long but she became</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A joyful mother of two goodly sons,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, which was strange, the one so like the other</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As could not be distinguish’d but by names.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That very hour, and in the self-same inn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A mean woman was delivered</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of such a burden, male twins, both alike.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those, for their parents were exceeding poor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I bought, and brought up to attend my sons.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made daily motions for our home return.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unwilling I agreed; alas, too soon</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We came aboard.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A league from Epidamnum had we sail’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the always-wind-obeying deep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gave any tragic instance of our harm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But longer did we not retain much hope;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what obscured light the heavens did grant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did but convey unto our fearful minds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A doubtful warrant of immediate death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which though myself would gladly have embrac’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weeping before for what she saw must come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That mourn’d for fashion, ignorant what to fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forc’d me to seek delays for them and me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this it was (for other means was none).</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sailors sought for safety by our boat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My wife, more careful for the latter-born,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had fast’ned him unto a small spare mast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such as sea-faring men provide for storms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To him one of the other twins was bound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whilst I had been like heedful of the other.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The children thus dispos’d, my wife and I,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fix’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fast’ned ourselves at either end the mast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, floating straight, obedient to the stream,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At length the sun, gazing upon the earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dispers’d those vapours that offended us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by the benefit of his wished light</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The seas wax’d calm, and we discovered</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two ships from far, making amain to us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ere they came⁠—O, let me say no more!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gather the sequel by that went before.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, forward, old man, do not break off so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For we may pity, though not pardon thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegeon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, had the gods done so, I had not now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Worthily term’d them merciless to us.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We were encountered by a mighty rock,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which being violently borne upon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So that, in this unjust divorce of us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fortune had left to both of us alike</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What to delight in, what to sorrow for.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdened</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was carried with more speed before the wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in our sight they three were taken up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At length another ship had seiz’d on us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gave healthful welcome to their ship-wrack’d guests,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And would have reft the fishers of their prey,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had not their bark been very slow of sail;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore homeward did they bend their course.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus have you heard me sever’d from my bliss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That by misfortunes was my life prolong’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do me the favour to dilate at full</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What have befall’n of them and thee till now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegeon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At eighteen years became inquisitive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After his brother, and importun’d me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That his attendant, so his case was like,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reft of his brother, but retain’d his name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might bear him company in the quest of him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom whilst I laboured of a love to see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hazarded the loss of whom I lov’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or that or any place that harbours men.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But here must end the story of my life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And happy were I in my timely death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could all my travels warrant me they live.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hapless Aegeon, whom the fates have mark’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bear the extremity of dire mishap;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which princes, would they, may not disannul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My soul should sue as advocate for thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But though thou art adjudged to the death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And passed sentence may not be recall’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But to our honour’s great disparagement,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet will I favour thee in what I can.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, merchant, I’ll limit thee this day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To seek thy health by beneficial help.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And live; if no, then thou art doom’d to die.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Jailer, take him to thy custody.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Jailer</td>
							<td>I will, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Aegeon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hopeless and helpless doth Aegeon wend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But to procrastinate his lifeless end. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
				<p>A public place.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</b> and a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merchant</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merchant</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This very day a Syracusian merchant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is apprehended for arrival here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, not being able to buy out his life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>According to the statute of the town</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is your money that I had to keep.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within this hour it will be dinnertime;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till that, I’ll view the manners of the town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then return and sleep within mine inn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For with long travel I am stiff and weary.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Get thee away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Many a man would take you at your word,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And go indeed, having so good a mean. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I am dull with care and melancholy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lightens my humour with his merry jests.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, will you walk with me about the town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then go to my inn and dine with me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merchant</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am invited, sir, to certain merchants,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of whom I hope to make much benefit.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I crave your pardon. Soon, at five o’clock,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Please you, I’ll meet with you upon the mart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And afterward consort you till bedtime.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My present business calls me from you now.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Farewell till then: I will go lose myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wander up and down to view the city.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Merchant</td>
							<td>Sir, I commend you to your own content. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Merchant</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He that commends me to mine own content</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commends me to the thing I cannot get.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I to the world am like a drop of water</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in the ocean seeks another drop,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, failing there to find his fellow forth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So I, to find a mother and a brother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here comes the almanac of my true date.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What now? How chance thou art return’d so soon?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Return’d so soon? rather approach’d too late.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mistress made it one upon my cheek.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is so hot because the meat is cold;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The meat is cold because you come not home;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You come not home because you have no stomach;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have no stomach, having broke your fast;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But we that know what ’tis to fast and pray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are penitent for your default today.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stop in your wind, sir, tell me this, I pray:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where have you left the money that I gave you?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, sixpence that I had o’ Wednesday last</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pay the saddler for my mistress’ crupper:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The saddler had it, sir, I kept it not.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am not in a sportive humour now.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We being strangers here, how dar’st thou trust</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So great a charge from thine own custody?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pray you jest, sir, as you sit at dinner:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I from my mistress come to you in post;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I return, I shall be post indeed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For she will score your fault upon my pate.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And strike you home without a messenger.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td>To me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell me how thou hast dispos’d thy charge.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My charge was but to fetch you from the mart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mistress and her sister stay for you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, as I am a Christian, answer me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In what safe place you have bestow’d my money,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That stands on tricks when I am undispos’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have some marks of yours upon my pate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some of my mistress’ marks upon my shoulders,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not a thousand marks between you both.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I should pay your worship those again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perchance you will not bear them patiently.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td>Thy mistress’ marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your worship’s wife, my mistress at the Phoenix;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio of Ephesus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What mean you, sir? for God’s sake hold your hands.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, an you will not, sir, I’ll take my heels. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dromio</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antipholus of Syracuse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Upon my life, by some device or other</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The villain is o’er-raught of all my money.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They say this town is full of cozenage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Soul-killing witches that deform the body,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And many such-like liberties of sin:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll to the Centaur to go seek this slave.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I greatly fear my money is not safe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
